the international court of justice has
ruled that Israel must act immediately
to prevent a genocide in Gaza it was
responding to a case brought by South
Africa which accuses Israel of
committing genocide against Palestinians
in Gaza the court said that Israel must
do more to protect civilians there but
did not Grant South Africa's request for
a
ceasefire the full case is expected to
take years before a final ruling that
Israel must take measures within its
power
to prevent and punish the direct and
public incitement to commit genocide in
relation to the members of the
Palestinian group in the Gaza
Strip the court further considers that
Israel must take immediate and effective
measures to enable the provision of
urgently needed basic services and
humanitarian assistance to address the
adverse conditions of Life faced by
Palestinians in the Gaza
Strip Israel must also take effective
meas measures to prevent the destruction
and ensure the preservation of evidence
related to allegations of Acts within
the scope of Article 2 and article 3 of
the genocide convention against members
of the Palestinian group in the Gaza
Strip and let's give more we are joined
by DW's Tanya Kramer in Jerusalem so
what's the reaction in
Israel well there just has been a
statement now it's a Friday afternoon
the country goes into the weekend so we'
been just hearing from Israel's prime
minister Benjamin Netanyahu he gave a
statement so let's have a listen to what
he had to say Israel has an inherent
right to defend itself the vile attempt
to deny Israel this fundamental right is
blatant discrimination against the
Jewish State and it was justly rejected
the charge of genocide leveled against
Israel is not only false it's outrageous
and decent people everywhere should
reject it and the eve of the
international Holocaust Remembrance Day
I again pledge as Israel's prime
minister never again Israel will
continue to defend itself against
Hamas well he also uh spoke about that
uh Israel will continue uh to provide or
make it possible for humanitarian aid
but uh he said in this statement um you
know that it was uh the charge was
rejected that is certainly not what most
people would read into it of course the
icj has uh stopped short of ordering
provisional measures pertaining to uh a
ceasefire but it has it it has said it
seen merits in the case so this case
will continue of course this could take
uh um many years for a final ruling but
it has ordered Israel uh to implement
provisionally provisional measures um
among them to ensure you know of not
killing or causing bodily harm to
Palestinians but also to ensure to
provide the basic needs of Palestinians
now in the statement as I said prime
minister Netanyahu uh continues in
saying they doing so but the question is
you know will they change course and
anything will they also comply to
another measure it needs to implement to
report back to the court in in a month
time there will be certainly be more
pressure also by Israel allies so that
Israel will comply to these measures and
on the ground of course there's also the
question now while Palestinians are
saying in reactions at least some
accountability uh when it comes to
Israel's actions of course what does it
mean for Palestinians in Gaza for uh the
civilian population there uh will it
change anything for them in the ground
and we've been hearing in this hearing
you know the very detailed description
of a very dire situation uh for
Palestinians uh in Gaza and with the
winter with the really cold coming into
the region um you know it's still to see
what it will change for them right now
on the ground ananya Kramer with a view
from Jerusalem thank you so
much and we have the view from
Johannesburg where DW correspondent
Diane Hawker is standing by what's the
reaction where you
are well the initial re reaction has
actually come from South Africa's
international relations Minister Ned
Pand who was speaking on the steps of
the heg she went to the court to hear
the outcome and one of the things she
said was that she was thankful to the
court for dealing with this matter
expeditiously let's listen to what El
she had to
say I believe that in exercising uh the
uh order there would have to be a
ceasefire without it the order uh
doesn't actually
work I would have wanted a
c no way that I'm going to say I'm
disappointed I hoped for it but the fact
of delivering humanitarian Aid the fact
of taking measures that reduce the
levels of harm against persons who have
no role in what Israel uh is combating
for me requires a ceasefire and I
now the minister um speaking there um
after her Department put out a statement
in which it said that the decision at
the icj was a resounding victory for
South Africa we're also expecting to
hear from South Africa's president s
Raposa who was amongst ANC delegates who
are attending ANC leadership meeting
today we've seen videos on social media
um showing ANC uh party members many of
whom are members of government rejoicing
with this outcome um singing uh struggle
songs and saying that this was a a
resounding victory for the thec Le
government I think from the perspective
of many South Africans this um ruling is
a very positive ruling um we know that
in South Africa uh particularly in the
major cities there' have been regular
protests in support of the people of
Palestine and of course there is a
feeling amongst many South Africans that
there is a a connection between South
Africa and the Palestinian territories
one that was fostered and and nurtured
by our former president Nelson Mandela
and one that many South Africans have
taken on to this day feeling that
there's a need for us to to speak up and
feeling that there's a need for for the
South African government to act when it
sees um you know wrongdoing what the the
decision will mean in Practical terms
we'll still have to see of course
there's still the issue of the report
that will have to be submitted and it
does seem like it will be a long
continuous legal battle um that South
Africa will be involved in receiving
those reports from the the icj and then
responding and commenting on them but
for the most part the feeling in South
Africa is one of of Happiness one that
South Africa has done the right thing
and that it has uh um achieved an
international Victory speaking up on
behalf of those who are disenfranchised
DW's Diane Hawker in Johan B thank
you and let's get more with Marco
longobardo he is a reader in
international law at the University of
Westminster good to have you with us um
does the ruling come as a surprise to
you thank you no the ruling didn't come
as a surprise I think it's a clear
victory for South Africa who got obtain
an an order on provisional measures that
recognized that there is a a serious
risk of a genocide in the Gaza Strip it
would been quite unlikely to obtain a an
order on ceasefire because the court in
this case has only jurisdiction over
genocide and the use of force by Israel
is not strictly linked to a genocide
claim so the court
EXC right sorry to interrupt you there
um but I you know people are just
looking at the face of it here and and
and you know perhaps some people were
expecting whether or not we were going
to get a verdict on on a ceasefire today
the court did not order to Halt Israel's
military action in Gaza and Israel's
prime minister Benjamin Netanyahu has
already said that Israel will not stop
its offensive in Gaza so what good is
the verdict then can you just break it
down for us a bit yes the verdict wasn't
on whether Israel has committed or not
genocide in Gaza was about their risk
that during the legal proceedings that
are ongoing to establish this H the
rights of the gazan population would
have been affected through a genocide
and so the court ordered some measures
to protect the rights of the gazan
population pending the Judgment one of
the measure that was requested was the
ceasefire the court decided to give more
discretion to Israel to H comply with
the order not committing a genocide
preventing genocide without spending out
a duty to seize the military operations
clearly if Israel decides to stop the
military operation that would be the
best and quickest way to H protect the
rights of the Palestinian population but
the court didn't go that far because its
jurisdiction on this case was limited to
the genocide question um one thing that
the court did do it did um established
that it had jurisdiction to hear this
case we know that um Israel's attorneys
had um you know basically motioned to
have it thrown out and now the this
interim ruling is is part of a case a
larger case as you've highlighted there
brought by South Africa accusing Israel
of committing genocide against
Palestinians in Gaza so can you just
walk us through the step-by-step process
um because we obviously did not have a
ruling on that today so what sort of
timetable are we looking at what can we
expect now in the next year
yes the case will be quite long it's
based on the genocide convention and
it's about Israel committing genocide in
Gaza Israel not preventing genocide from
being committed Israel not punishing
people responsible for genocide and
Israel not addressing incitement so it's
a complex case the next steps would be
the Merit phace it is quite likely that
the that Israel would decide to
challenge the jurisdiction of the Court
we have to remember that today the
jurisdiction was only found as a
preliminary ruling on an emergent issue
the interim measures but we could expect
a stage on whether really there is
jurisdiction uh by the court I think the
jurisdiction is quite sound and then a
longer Merit stage consider that the two
completed the genocide cases before for
the court that we had so far lasted one
14 and the other 16 years so are very
long proceedings and because of this
it's very important that we had
provisional measures
ordered
urgently Dr Marco longobardo reader at
the international law at the University
of Westminster thank you so much for
sharing that legal
expertise thank
you and joining us here in the studio is
Middle East analyst shaie rosanes shaie
it was quite interesting actually to
hear their reactions from Netanyahu also
the reactions of from the South African
attorney as well neither really seemed
terribly satisfied um with with this
ruling does that say something about it
yeah the court managing an unbelievable
new one decision that took only 10 days
to to achieve to actually make each side
win a little bit but also lose a little
bit Israel is in a way uh happy for the
fact that it was not forced to seize the
fire that was the main point that
Israelis were looking at will they be
forced you know to Halt uh the fire
having not gotten that uh measure is
somewhat of a victory for Israel but
then at the same time as we heard Nan
the very fact that the court did not
miss dismiss the charges you know that
it's saying there might be Merit to the
allegations of South Africa that for
itself is is a blow for Israel at the
same time you know we look at South
Africa look at the Palestinians you know
the South Africa as a voice for the
Palestinians finally feeling that they
have a voice that they are being seen
that there might be a chance to stop
this war or to somehow give Justice and
protect the rights of the Palestinians
for dignity for Freedom um and and we've
seen you know the dire conditions in in
Gaza so if you talk to people in Gaza
they hope that the court might finally
give them some of the of of the Justice
I've been waiting for for over 100 days
let's just drill down for a second and
what exactly the court is asking for
here's just one aspect of it and I'd
like to just read it out it says that um
Israel is required to prevent and punish
the direct public incitement to commit
genocide it was really interesting to
hear um the court actually read out some
you know pretty prominent quotes from
high ranking politicians including the
Israeli president the minister of
defense for example essentially to
paraphrase calling for the destruction
of Gaza do you think that Israel is
likely to abide by this particular
aspect well um you know interestingly
enough the Israeli judge who's part of
the 17 judges panel was actually
supportive of these measures uh that was
16 to1 the only one against it was the
Ugandan one so we also see within
Israeli ranks within Israeli Society
those who are against those statements
um and there's a lot of inner criticism
of whether these very you know there's a
difference between what you say as a
political pundit and what you say as
your at your role as a as a political
also as a as a leader of the country and
we've seen that with with uh defense
minister galland who already responded
saying I will not they take lessons IM
morality from no one especially not the
heg but but we do know that there's
great support for the war but at the
same time Israel is very attuned to
criticism International critic criticism
International Community needs and it's
been willing to cooperate with this
court which it has not done before so I
believe they will take a good listen and
will examine the the measures and will
try to comply as much as they can how do
you think Israel's allies are looking at
today because I mean you know we have
heard the resounding message from the
Allies which is Israel of course has a
rights to its defense a right to respond
but we've heard increasing criticism
about how Israel has responded there
there's a lot of distaste forre um the
number of civilians who have been killed
corre I'm sure there's a sigh of relief
in the white house for example today
hearing this response uh of the Court
these measures because they've been
pushing very much for more humanitarian
aid for Israel to scale down its
operations um we also in Europe we've
seen that and miraculously this this
court has managed to bring all sides
including China and R Us France and so
many more other countries to a unanimous
vote on these measures so the world very
much wants to see less um less violence
in Gaza Israel is aware of the fact it
cannot ignore those uh those those the
world anymore and I'm sure we will be
seeing it in the next weeks unfolding DW
sh rosanas thank you you're
welcome